# Code explanation: Awesun Solar Visualiser (7.12.24)

One of the projects I've enjoyed working on most has been the Awesun Solar Visualiser App, providing a front-end interface connected to a UK live solar energy production data API.

It is available for viewing at the following address:
https://awesun-solar-visualiser.vercel.app/

In this code explanation, I review the way I structured the code and achieved the functionality in the web page and reflect on the strengths and weakenesses of the design.

## The page elements:

It is a single-page application with 6 main elements.

1. The animated and state-responsive sun
2. The animated and state-responsive clouds
3. The graphs showing solar energy production
4. The toggle buttons for weekly, monthly and year
5. The peak production statistics for the week, month and year
6. The 'hovered information' statistic

# Components

- BarHoveredInformation.jsx
- Clouds.jsx
- Graph.jsx
- GraphSelector.jsx
- Header.jsx
- SolarApp.jsx (which contains all the other UI components)
- Sun.jsx

## Page.js

### imports / props

- imports several helper functions for manipulating the solar energy data fetched from the API

### function body

- sets all relevant time variables for sorting the data
- declares the getSolar data function with the api end point, inputting start and end dates and times into the parameters of the url and including settings to prevent caching.
- fetches data for each time period through an await Promise structure, which is then filtered.
- searches the data for each time period to set the weeks.
- collates all relevant data and peaks into a single object to allow for neater prop-passing to components.

### return

- a div that fills the whole screen with a sky background gradient using a negative z index
- the SolarApp component, with the allData(and peaks) object passed down as props

## SolarApp.jsx - the main component ('grandparent')

This is the main component that contains the entire UI within it.

### imports/props

- receives props of allFetchedData from the page.js file

### function body

- destructures data passed from page.js
- manages state for graphToDisplay, sunSize, barHovered, and cloudOpacity
- declares functions for handlingBarHover
- declares a graphConfig object with nested week, month and year values to allow just one Graph.jsx file

### return

This grandparent component has children beneath it for the entire web UI.

- The Header.jsx with peakData as a prop
- The Sun.jsx with sunSize as a prop
- The Clouds.jsx with a cloudOpacityState as a prop
- A div fixed to the bottom 37% of the screen with maximum z-index containing the GraphSelector.jsx and the BarHoveredInformation.jsx
- The Graph.jsx file with state-based graphConfig props passed down depending on which graph is currently selected (e.g. dataToDisplay={graphConfig[graphToDisplay].dataToDisplay})

## Header.jsx

### imports / props

- imports: getTimeHalfHourLater
- props: peak data and times

### function body

- destructures all peak data received as props, and gets times 'half our later' for display.

### return

- section flex container with elements spaced with justify-between.
- displayed on the left is the heading and on the right are the peak production statistics.
- many superfluous text elements have the hide-when-portrait class to cater for small mobile screens.

## BarHoveredInformation.jsx

### imports/props

- props: barHovered state, barHoveredInformation state

### function body

- none

### return

- section with variables displayed on screen
- font size uses tailwind class names

## Clouds.jsx

### imports/props

- styles to help with the moving clouds
- props for the cloudOpacityState

### function body

- none

### return

- absolute positioned section with overflow hidden that has and 3 imgs within it
- each image shares the same image and opacity state, transitioning from left to right and snapping back to the left.
- the imgs are positioned _relatively_ to ensure they are positioned centred (vertically) on screen
- each img has a different starting position: -100%, 0%, 100%, enabling a smooth never-ending transitioning
- each img has a moving

## THINGS I LIKE ABOUT THE CODE-DESIGN

### The initial fetched data

- The initial fetching of data haappens on the server-side with, benefits for performance on slow devices, SEO, API keys remaining private, and no-caching benefits.
- The data is structured neatly into a single data object to maintain readability.

### Responsive sizing

- created a reusable hide-when-portrait class to help hide elements that small phone screens do not have space for.

### Use of state within handleBarHover function

- In the handleBarHover function the graphToDisplay state is used neatly with an object

  let peakForComparison = {
  week: peakFromWeek,
  month: peakFromMonth,
  year: peakFromYear,
  }[graphToDisplay];

### Passing of props

- The code is neatly organised with only props that need to be being passed down to each component, adding clarity and preventing unecessary re-renders.
- States for sunSize, cloudOpacity, graphDisplayed and barHovered are managed together at the top-level in SolarApp.jsx, enabling a neat passing down of states and props.

### Sun and Clouds

- The Sun and Clouds are coded with props for the sunSize and cloudOpacity sent down from the parent, improving the readability of the codebase
- Their responsiveness to the graph being hovered is obvious yet smooth and logical.

### Graphs

- the graphConfig object in SolarApp.jsx with nested week, month and year values to allow just one Graph.jsx file (instead of a week, month and year file). These values are fed through as state-based props (depneding on the graph hovered).

## IMPROVEMENTS I COULD MAKE

- alter the fetch calls to be made into a single fetch rather than 1 for each time period.
- make it more obvious to a new user that hovering bars shows updated information and alters the sun and clouds.
- add new functionality to support further user needs.
